Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and I'm say
continuing on telling you why angles do not
really work they are an improper foundation for
geometry and trigonometry despite what millions
of students are being taught every year it's
very interesting and informative to go back to
a historical understanding of how angles arose
angles arose in Babylonian times when they were
studying astronomy the critical fact about the
world in which we live in from an astronomical
point of view is that the earth itself is spinning
around its axis once every 24 hours that means our
view of the celestial sky is rotating above
us at a uniform rate so there's naturally an
association between the angular motion of
our spinning earth and time ticking by it
means that for astronomy angles are natural
and a good concept because they have a direct
physical connection to time in fact for most of
the years that trigonometry has been studied for
two or three thousand years the emphasis has
been on the spherical trigonometry associated
to astronomy planar trigonometry was relatively
unimportant until only a few centuries ago it's
also interesting to remark that Euclid's elements
which was the bible for geometry for 2,000 years
explicitly avoided using the notion of the
measurement of an angle this is not because
Euclid did not know about angle measurements he
certainly knew about it it's because in my view
he was unsure about how to introduce this
concept in a rigorous fashion in that sense
Euclid was more concerned with rigor than many
modern writers of geometry textbooks who feel
no compunction whatsoever to have to actually say
precisely what this crucial term actually means
there's a bit of confusion though with or with
Euclid because the word angle is often used
in translations of the elements but it means
for Euclid the configuration the geometrical
configuration of two intersecting lines so Euclid
often refers to this picture as an angle he's not
referring to a measurement in degrees between
these two lines he's referring rather to this
configuration itself and when he says that
this and this are equal angles he means that
this configuration can be superimposed on that
configuration by a congruence he does not mean
that the measurements of these two angles are
the same because Euclid does not measure angles
and it's also interesting to note that the term
Radian was introduced relatively late in the story
only in 1871 by the brother of Lord Kelvin which
brings us naturally to the next column associated
with angles which is that concerning units there
are a number of different unit systems to choose
and there are irrationalities associated to some
of these systems the simplest possible angle is
perhaps that between two perpendicular lines
which the Babylonians used 90 degrees for okay
in the modern radiance system this angle is much
more complicated and when I say much I mean like
trillions of times as complicated as 90 degrees
okay it's this number of one point five seven
zero seven nine six three two six seven nine dot
dot dot which is modern mathematics sloppy way of
saying well it kind of goes on in some way that
we don't really know about it doesn't stop it
keeps on going and the pattern whatever it is
is not known to us psychologically can we make
things simpler for ourselves by introducing this
Greek symbol pi and calling this pi over two as
if that somehow makes all the complexities disk
disappear but of course they don't they're still
there in Europe there's another alternative system
which is sometimes used sometimes a 90 degrees is
referred to as 100 grads the number of pi over 2
is an irrational number otherwise it would have a
repeating decimal this was established by Lambert
and contemporary boiler in the 18th century and
many standard angles have this property that
they're in fact irrational numbers so they're
very hard to get hold of with our usual framework
of arithmetic for example here's our grid plane
if I choose two lines in this plane say the
x-axis and that line through the origin n2 3
then typically the angle between those lines is
very hard to compute accurately in this case the
angle would be computed by a modern mathematician
as something like 10 inverse of 3 over 2 and then
their calculators would spit out something like
this point nine eight two seven so and so on with
another dot dot dot representing those trillions
trillions of digits that we don't that are not
written down we could convert that into degrees
in degrees it's not that much better it's 56
point 3 0 9 9 3 2 dot dot dot and again there's
no rhyme or reason that's very easily apparent to
how those digits continue to compare that with
rational trigonometry in rational trigonometry
the spread between these two lines happens to be
9 over 13 which you can say is the trillions of
times simpler and more natural than this kind
of gobbledygook an issue that often confuses
physics students when they meet the definition of
an angle is length of an arc divided by the length
of the radius is both of these are quantities of
length so shouldn't the result of the quotient be
a dimensionless quantity shouldn't it essentially
have no units at all that's a kind of a puzzling
and interesting question why do we need units at
all if we're measuring angles all right now we
come to the fourth problem is the ambiguity
and the imprecision with which angles imbue
geometry this is a big subject I'm gonna have to
say quite a lot about it but let's start with the
ambiguity which is very clear an angle theta is
ambiguous in the sense it's only determined up
to 360 degrees you can always add 360 degrees and
you have essentially the same angle unfortunately
in the Radian system 360 degrees is represented
replaced by 2 pi in this case 6.2 a 3 blah blah
this is a very important number okay that appears
in many places in mathematics because the angles
system is being used but it means for example
that the angle that we computed on the previous
page which was point nine eight and so on and
so forth has alternate equivalent formulations
by adding multiples of this angle to it so
it's also equal to that same angle is also
equal to seven point two six five nine seven
nine zero dot dot dot and if we had subtracted
two pi instead we would have it's also equal to
minus five point three zero zero three nine one
five eight dot dot dot and there's trillions of
other possibilities all similarly complicated
for the same angle your reaction to this should
be something like why are people doing this this
is really completely silly type of mathematics
now let's talk about the imprecision that this
necessarily leads to all right so I make the
following clay that using angles it becomes
almost impossible to solve concrete geometrical
problems correctly you lose contact with the
actual correct solutions to the widest variety
of geometrical problems to give just an initial
indication of why this might be true here's a
kind of a random problem which I've just made
up here's a triangle ABC with sides 5 7 & 4
so these are lengths and now I'm gonna make a
geometrical problem I'll just sort of make it
up at random so let's take the angle bisector
at this vertex a so that this angle is the same
as that angle because there's an angle bisector
and we'll suppose that it meets this new side at
a new point B and now let's sort of go an angle 45
degrees from D till we meet to this point B over
here so we've made two constructions from this
triangle this bisector and then this angle over
here this point e and now the question is what is
the distance between C and E I haven't solved
this problem yet I'm going to do so and then
I'm gonna come back and show you next video but
this is an example of a problem that I claim that
most mathematicians if they're going to use angles
they cannot solve this problem correctly like they
can't solve millions of problems correctly give
to your favorite math professor as a challenge
ask him to solve this problem correctly and see
what he comes up with or she comes up with next
time we're going to talk about the further
ramifications of this very important claim
obviously this has a lot to do with mathematics
education and the usage of mathematics in the
real world I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening